# 1.1.7 Example: Square Roots by Newton's Method.

Procedures, as intorduced above, are much like oridnary mathematical functions. They specify a value that is determined by one ore more paramenters. But there is an important differeence between mathematica functions and computer procedures. Procedures must be effective.

As a case in point, consider the problem of computing square roots. We can define the square-root functions as

`sqrt(x) = the y such that y >=0 and y**2 == x`

This describes a perfectly legitimate mathematical function. We could use it to recognize whether one number is the squrare root of another, or to derive fact about square roots in general. On the other hand, the definition does not describe a procedure. Indeed, it tells us almost nothing about how to actually find the square root of a given number. It will not help matters of peharase this definition in pseudo-Lisp:

```lisp
(deifne (sqrt x)
(the y (and (>= y0) (= (square y) x))s))
```

This only begs the question.

The contrast between function ad procedure is a reflection of the general distincion betweeen describing properites of things and describing how to do things, or, as iti t sometimes reffered to, the distinction between declarative knowledge and imperative knowledge. In mathematics we are usually concerned with declarative (what is) descriptions, whereas in computer science we are usully concerned with imperative (how to) descriptions.

Declarative and imperative descriptions are intimately related, ad indeed are mathematics and computer sceince. For instance, to say that the answer produced by a porgram is "correct" is to make declaratie statement about the program. There is a large amount of research aimed at establishing techniques for proving that programs are correct, and much of the technical difficulty of this subject has to do with negotiation the transition between imparative statements (from which programs are constructed) and declarative statements (which can be sued to deduce things). in a related vein, an important current area in programming-language design is the exploration of so-called very hight-level languages, in which one actually programs in terms of declarative statements. The idea is to make interpreters sophisticated enoush so that, given "what is" knowledge specified by the programmer, they can generate "how to" knowledge automatically. This cannot be done in general, but there are important areas where progress has been madde. We shall revisit this indea in Chapter 4.



How does one compute square roots? The most common way is to use Newton's method of successive approximations, which says  that whenever we have a guess `y` fo  the value of the square root of a number `x`, we can perform a simple manipulation to get a better guess (one close to the acutal square root) by averating `y` with `x/y`.

This square root algorithm is actually a special case of Newton's method, which is a general technique for finding roots of equations. The square-root algorithm itslef was developed by Heron of Alexandria in the first sentuary A.D. We will see how to eapress the general Newton's method as a List procedure in Sections 1.3.4.

For example, we can compute the square root of 2 as follows. Suppose our initial gues is 1:

 Gues | Quotient | Average 
 --- | --- | ---
 1 | (2/1) = 2 | ((2+1)/2) = 1.5
 1.5 | (2/1.5) = 1.333 | ((1.3333 + 1.5)/2) = 1.4167
 1.4167 | (2/1.4167) = 1.4118 | ((1.4167 + 1.4118)/2) = 1.4142

 Continuing this process, we obtain better and better approximations to the square root.

 Now let's formalize the process in terms of procedures. We start with a value for the radicand (the number whose square root we are trying to compute) and a value for the guess. If the guess is good enough for our purposes, we are done; if not, we must repeat the process with an improved guess. We write this basic strategy as a procedure:

 ```Lisp
 ( define (sqrt-iter guess x)
 ( if (good-enough? guess x) 
    guess
    (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)

 ))
 ```

A guess is improved by averaging it with the quotient of the radicand and the old guess:

```Lisp
(define (improve guess x)
(average guess (/ x guess)))
```

where

```Lisp
(define (average x y) (/ (+ x y) 2))
```

We also have to say what we mean by "good enough". The following will do for illustraion, but it is not really a very good test. (See Exercise 1.7.) The idea is to improve the answer until it is close enought so that its square differs from the radicand by less than a predetermined tolerance (here 0.001): *(22)*

```Lisp
(deifine (good-enough? guess x)
(< (abs (- (square guess) x) 0.001))
```

> *(22)* We will usually give predicates names ending with question marks, to help us remember that they are predicates. This is just a stylistic convention. As far a the interpreter is oncerned, the question mark is just an orinary character.

Finally, we need a way to get started. For instance, we can always guess that the square root for any number is 1: *(23)*

```Lisp
(define (sqrt x) (sqrt-iter 1.0 x))
```

> *(23)* Observe that we express our initial guess as 1.0 rather than 1. This would not maky any difference in many Lisp implementations. MIT Scheme, howerver, distinguishes between exact integers and decimal values, and dividing two integers produces a rational number rather than a decimal. For example, dividing 10 by 6 yelds 5/3, while dividing 10.0 by 6.0 yields 1.6...67. (We will earn how to implement arithmetic on ratinal numbers in Section 2.1.1) If we start with an initial guess of 1 in our square-root program, and x is an exact integer, all subsequent values produced in the square-root computation will be rational numbers rather than decimals. Mixed operations on rational numbers and decimals always yield decimals, so starting with an initial guess of 1.0 forces all subsequent values to be decimals.

If we type these definitions to the interpreter, we can use `sqrt` just as we can use an procedure:

`(sqrt 9`)
3.00009155413138

`(sqrt (+ 100 37))`
11.704699917758145

`(sqrt (+ (sqrt 2) (sqrt3)))`
1.7739279023207892

`(square (sqrt 1000))`
1000.000369924366

The sqrt program also illustrates that the simple procedural languagewe have intorduced so far is sufficient for writing any purely numberal program that one could write in, say, C or Pascal. This might seem surpricing, since we have not included in our language any iterative (looping) constructs that direct the computer to do something over and over again. `sqrt-iter`, on the other hand demonstartes how iteration can be accomplished using no special construct other than the ordinary ability to call a rpcedure. *(24)*

> *(24)* Readers who are worried about the efficincy issues involved in using procedure calls to implement itartion should note ther remarks on "tail recursion" in Section 1.2.1

## Exercise: 1.6

Alyssa P. Hacker doesn't see why `if` needs be provided as a special form. 'Hy can't I just define it as ordinary procedure in terms of cond?" she asks. Alyssya's friend Eva Lu Ator claims this can indeed be done. and she defines a new version of `if`:

```Lisp
( define (new-if predicate thatn-clause else-clause)
   (cond (predicate then-clause) (else else-clause)))
```

Eva demonstrates the program for Alyssa

```Lisp
(new-if (= 2 3) 0 5)
5
(new-if (= 1 1) 0 5)
```

Delighted, Alyssay uses new-if to rewrite the square-root program

```Lisp
(define (sqrt-iter quess x)
(new-if (good-enought? guess x)
 guess
 (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))
```

What happens when Alyssa attempts to use this to compute square roots? Explain.

> Will be a infinite loop. Because of applicative order of evaluation. When both artuments
of procedure are evaluated first. There will be no stop for recursion.

