## 1.1.5 The Substitution Model for Procedure Applicaction

To evaluate a comination whose operator names a compound procedure, the interpreter follow much the same porecess as for combinations whose operators name primitive procedures, which we described in section 1.1.3.

That is, the interpreter evaluates the elements of the combination and applices the procedure (which is the value of the operator of the combination) to the artuments (which are the values of the operands of the combination).

We can assume that the mechanism for appliying primitive procedures to arguments is build into the interpretr. 

For compound procedures, the applicaion process is as follows:

To apply a compound procedure to arguments, evaluate the body of the procedure with each formal parameters replaced by the correspoding argument.

To illustrate this process, let's evaluate the compbination

```
(f 5)
```

where `f` is the procedure defined in Section 1.1.4. We begin by retrieving the body of `f`:

```
(sum-of-squares (+ a 1) (* a 2))
```

Then we replace the formal parameter `a` by the argument `5`:

```
(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))
```

Thus the problem reduces to the evaluation of a combination with two operans and an operator `sum-of-squares`.
We must evaluate the operator to get the procedure to be applied, and we must evalutate the operands to get arguements.

Now `(+ 5 1)` prduces 6 and `(* 5 2)` produces `10`, so we must apply the `sum-of-squares` precodure to `6` and `10`. These values a substituted for the formal parameters `x` and `y` in the body of `sum-of-squares`, reducing the expression to

```
( + (square 6) (square 10))
```

If we use the definition of `square`, this redues to

```
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))
```

which reduces by multiplication to 

```
(+ 36 100)
```

and finally to

```
136
```

The process we have just described is called the `substitution model` for procedure application.
It can be takes as a model that determines the "meaning' of procedure application, insofar as the porcedures in this chapter are concerned.
However, there are two points that should be stressed:

- The purpose of the substitution is to help us thik about procedure application, not to provide a description of how the interpreter really works. Typical interpreters do not evaluate procedure applications by manipulating the text of a procedure to substitute values for the fromal parameters. In practice, the "substitution" is accomplished by using a local environment for the formal parameters. We will discuss this more fully in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 when we examine the implementatio of an interpreter in detail.

- Over the course of this book, we will present a sequence of increasingly elaborate models of how interpreters work, culminatig whit a complete implementation of an interpreter and compiler in Chapter 5. The substitution model is only the firs of these models - a way to get started thinking formally about the evaluation process. In general, when modeling phenomena in science and engineering, we began with simplified, incomplete models. As we examine things in greater detail, these simple models become inadequate and must be replaced by more refined models. The substitution model is not exception. In particular, when we address in Chapter 3 the use of procedures with "mutable data", we will see that the substitution model breaks down and must be replaced by a more complicated model of procedure application.

Despite the simplicity of the substitution idea, it turns out to be surprisingly complicated to give a rigorous mathematical definion of the substitution process. The problem arises from the possiblity of confusion between the names used for the formal parameters of a procedure and the (possibli identical) names used in the expressions to which the proceduremay be applied. Inded, there is a long history of errorneous definitions of substitution in the literature of logic and programming semantics. See Stoy 1977 for a careful discussion of substitution.

### Applicative order versus normal order

According to the description of evaluation given in **Section 1.1.3**, the interpreter first evaluates the operation and opverands and then applies the resultin procedure to the resulting arguments.
This is not the only way to perform evaluation.
An alternative evaluation model would not evaluate the operands untill their values were needed.