# 1.1.6 Conditional Expressions and Predicates.

The expressive power of the class of procedures that we can define at this point is very limited, because we have no way to make tests and to perform different operations depending on the result of a test.

For instance, we cannot define a procedure that computes the absolute value of a number by testing whether the number is poistive, negative. or zero and taking different actions in the different cases according to the rule

This construct is called a *case analysis*, and there is a special from in Lisp for notation such a case analysis. It is called `cond` (which stands for "conditional"), and it is used as follows:

```lisp
( define (abs x)
    (cond ((> x 0) x)
        ((= x 0) 0)
        ((< x 0) (- x))
    )

)
```

The general from of a conditional expression is consisting of the symbol cond followed by parenthesized pairs of expressions called clauses.

The first expression in each pair is a *predicate* - that is, and expression whose value is interpreted as either true of false.

"Interpreted as either true or false" means this: In Scheme, there are to distinguish values that are denoted by the constants #t and #f. When the interpreter checks a predicate's value, it interprets #f as false. Any other value is treated as true. (This, providing #t is logically unnecessary, but it is convenient.) In this book we will use names `true` and `false`, which are associated with the values #t and #f respectively.

Conditional expressions are evaluated as follows. The predicate `<p1>` is evaluated first. It its value is false, thatn `<p2>` is evaluated. If `<p2>`'s value is alos false, then `<p3>` is evaluated. Thisprocess continues until a predicate is found whose value is true, in which case the interpreter returns the value of the corresponding *consequent expression* `<e>` of the clause as the value of the conditional expression. If non of the `<p>`'s is foud to be true, the value of the `cond` is undefined.

The word *predicate* is used for procedures that return true or false, as well as for expressions that evaluate to true or false. The absolute value prcedure `abs` make use of the primitive predicates `>`, `<`, and `=`. These take two numbers as arguments and test whether the furst number is, respectively, greater than, less than, or equal to the second number, returning true or false accordingly.

> `abs` also uses the "minus" operator -, which, when used with a single operand, as in `(- x)`, indicates negation.

Another way to write the absolute-value procedure is:

```lisp
( define (abs x)
    (cons ((< x 0) (- x))
    (else x))

)
```

which could be expressed in English as "If `x` is less then zero return `-x`; otherwise return `x`"  *else* is a special symbol that can be used in place of the `<p>` in the final clause of a `cond`. This causes the `cond` to return as its value the value of the corresponding `<e>` whenever all previeous clauses have been bypassed. In fact, any expression that always evaluates to a true value could be used as the `<p>` here.

Here is yet another way to write the absolute-value procedure:

```lisp
( define (abs x)
 (if (< x 0) (- x) x)
)
```

This uses the special form `if`, a restricted type of conditional that can be used when there are precisely two cases in the case analysis. The ganaral form of an `if` expression is

`(if <predicate> <consequent> <alternative>)`

To evaluate an `if` expression, the interpreter starts by evaluation the `<predicate>` part of the expression. If the `<predicate>` evaluates to a true value, the interpreter then evaluates the `<consequent>` and returns it's value. Otherwise it evaluates the `<alternative>` and returns its value.

> A minor difference between `if` and `cond` is the `<e>` part of each `cond` clause may be a sequence of expressions. If the coressponding `<p>` sif found to be true, the epressions `<e>` are evaluated in sequnce and the value of the final expression in the sequence is returned as the value of the `cond`. in an `if` expression, however, the `<consequent>` and `<alternative>` must be single expressions.

In addition to primitive predicates such as `<`, `=`, and `>`, there are logical composition operations, which enable us to cunstruct compund predicates. There three most frequently used are these.

- `(and <e1>...<en>)` The interpreter evaluates the expressionss `<e>` one at a time, in left-to-right order. If any `<e>` evaluates to false, the value of the `and` expression si false, and the ret of `<e>`'s are not evaluated. If all `<e>`'s evaluated to true values, teh value of the `and` expression is the value of the last one.

- `(or <e1> ... <en>)` The interpreter evaluates the expressions `<e>` one ata time, in left-to-right order. If any `<e>` evaluates to a true value, that vaule is returned as the value of the `or` expression, and the rest of the `<e>`'s are not evaluated. If all `<e>`s evaluated to false, the value of the `or` expression is false.

- `(not <e>)` The value of a `not` expression is true when the exrpression `<e>` evaluates to false, and false otherwise.

Notice that `and` and `or` a special forms, not procedures, because the subexpressions are not neccessarily all evaluated. `not` is an ordinary procedure.

As an example of how these are used, the condidtion that a number x in the range `5 < x < 10` may be expressed as

```lisp
(ans (> x 5) (< x 10))
```

As another example, we can define a predicate to test whether one number is greater than or equal to another as

```lisp
(define (>= x y) (or (> x y) (= x y)))
```

or alternatively as

```lisp
(define (>= x y) (not (< x y)))
```
