## 1.2.2 Tree Recursion

Anogher common pattern of computation is called *tree recursion*. As as example, consider computing the seqeunce of Fibonacci number in which each number is the sum of preceding two:

0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 12, 21, ....

In general, the Fibonacci numbers can be dedined by the rule

```
          | 0 if n = 0,
Fib(n) = <  1 if n = 1,
          | Fib(n-1) + Fib(n-2) otherwise.

```

We can immediately translate this definition into a recuresive procedure of computing Fibonacci numbers:

```Lisp
(define (fib n)
    (cond ((= n 0) 0)
    ((= n 1) 1)
    (else (+ (fib (- n 1)) 
            (fib (- n 2))))
    ))
```

Consider the pattern of this computation. To compute `(fib 5)`, we compute `(fib 4)` and `(fib 3)`. To compute `(fib 4)`, we compute `(fib 3)` and `(fib 2)`. In general, the evolved process looks like a tree, as show in `Figure 1.5`.  Notice that the branches split into two at each level (except at the bottom); this reflects the fact that the `fib` prcedure calls itself twice each time it is invoked.

This procedure is instructive as a prototypical tree recursion, but it is a terrible way to compute Fibonacci numbers because it does so mach redundant computation. Notice in Figure 1.5 that the entire computation of `(fib 3)` - almost a half the work - is dublicated. In fact, it is not hard to show that the number of times the procedure will compute `(fib 1)` or `(fib 0)` 9the number of leaves in the above tree, in general0 is precisely `Fib(n+1)`. To get an idea of how bad this is, one can show that the valude of `Fib(b)` growsn exmpnentially with `n`.M More preciselty (see Excercise 1.13), Fib(n) is the closest integer to `fi**2/sqrt(5)`.

```Ruby
fi = (1 + sqrt(5))/2 == 1.6180
```
is the *golden ration*, which satisfies the quation

```Ruby
fi*fi = fi + 1
```

**picture**

Figure 1.5: The tree-recursive precess generated in computiong `(fib 5)`.

This, the process uses a number of steps that grows exponentially with input. On the other hand, the space required grows only linearly with the input, because we need keep track only of which nodes are abouve us in tree at any point if the computation. In general, the number of steps required by a tree-recursive process will be proportional to the number of nodes in the tree, while the space will be proportional to the maximum depth of the tree.


We can also formulate an itarative process for computing the Fibonacci numbers. The idea is to use a pair of integers `a` and `b`, initiallize to `Fib(1) = 1` and `Fib(0) = 0`, and to repeatedly apply the simultaneous transofrmations

```
a <-- a + b
b <-- a
````

It is not hard to show that, after applying this transofmration `n` times, `a` and `b` will be equal, respectively to `Fib(n+1)` and `Fib(n)`. Thus we can compute Fibonacci numbers iteratively using the procedure

```Lisp
    (define (fib n)
        (fib-iter 1 0 n))
    (define (fib-iter a b count)
        (if (= count 0)
            b
            (fib-iter (+ a b) a (- count 1)))    
    ) 
```

This second method for computing `Fib(n)` is a linear iteration. The difference in number of steps required by the two medhos - on linear in `n`, one grows as fast as `Fib(n)` itself - is enormous, even for small inputs.

One should not conclude from this that tree-recursive porcesses are useless. When we consider processes that operate on hierarchically structured data rather tan numbers, we will find that tree recuresion is a natural and powerful tool. *(32)*

> *(32)* An example of this was hinted at in Section 1.13. The interpreter itself evaluates expressions using a tree-recursive process.

But even in numerical operations, tree-recusive processes can be usefull in helpoing us to understand and design programs. For instance, althought the fist `fib` procedure is much less efficeint than the second one, it is more strightforward, being little more than a translation into Lisp of the definithion of the Fibonacci secuence. To formulate the iterative algorithm required noticing that the computation could be recast as an iteration with three state variables.

### Example: Counting change

It takes only a bit of cleverness to come pu with the iterative Fibonacci algorithm. In contrast, consider the following problem: How may different ways can we make change of $1.00, given half-dollars, quarters, dimes, nickles, and pennies? More generally, can we write a procedure to compute the number of ways to change any given amount of money?

This problem has a simple soluton as a recursive procedure. Supose we think of the types of coins available as arranged in some order. Then the followng relatins holds:

The number of ways to change amount `a` usin `n` kinds of coins equals

- the number of ways to change amount `a` using all but the first kind of coin, plus
- the number of ways to change amount `a - d` using  all `n`  kinds of coins, where `d` is denomination of the first kind of coin.

To se why this is true, observe than the ways to make change can be divided into two groups: those that do not use any of the first kind of coin, and those that do. Therefore, the total number of ways to make change for some amount is equal to the number of ways to make change for the amount without using any of the first kind of coin, plus the number of ways to make change assuming that we do use the first kind of coin. But the latter number is equal to the number of ways to make change for the amount that remains after using a coin of the frist kind.

Thus, we can recursively reduce the problem of changing a given amount to the problem of changing smaller amounts using fewer kins of coins. Consider this reduction rule carefully, and convince yourself that we can use it to describe an algorithm if we specify the folowing degenarate cases: *(33)*


> *(33)* For example, work through in detail how the reduction rule applices to the problem of making change for 10 cents using pennies and nickels.

- If `a` is exeactly 0, we should count that as 1 way to make change.
- If `a` is less than 0, we should count tah as 0 ways to make change
- If `n` is 0, we dhould count that as 0 ways to make change.

We can easilyt translate this description itno a recuresive procedure:

```Lisp
(define (count-change amount) (cc amount 5))
(deifne (cc amount kinds-of-coins)
    (cond ((= amount 0) 1)
    ((or (< amount 0) (= kinds-of-coins 0)) 0)
    (else (+ (cc amount 
                (- kinds-of-coins 1))
            (cc (- amount 
                    (first-denomination kinds-of-coins))
                    kind-of-coins)
            )
    )))
(define (first-denominations kinds-of-coins)
    (cond ((= kinds-of-coins 1) 1)
        ((= kinds-of-coins 2) 5)
        ((= kinds-of-coins 3) 10)
        ((= kinds-of-coins 4) 25)
        ((= kinds-of-coins 5) 50)

    ))
```
(The `first-denominations` procedure takes as input the number of kinds of coins available and returns the denominations of the first kind. Here we are thinking of the coins as arranged in the order from largest to smalest, but any order would do as well.) We can now answer our original question about changing a dollar.

```
(count-change 100)
292
```

`count-change` generates a tree-recursive process with redundancies similar to those in our first implementation of `fib`. (It will take quite a while for that 292 to be computed.) On the other hand, it is not obvious how to design a better algorithm for computing the result, and we leave this problem as a challenge. The observation that a tree-recursive process may be hightly inefficient but ofter easy to sepcify and understand had led people to propose that one could get the best of both worlds by designing a "smart compiler" that could transfrom tree-recursive procedures into more efficent procedures that compute the same result. *(34)*

> *(34)* One approach to coping with redundant computation is to arrange matters so that we automatically construct a table of values as they are computed. Each time we asked to apply the procedure to some argument, we first look to see if the value is already stared in the table, in which case we  avoid performing the redundant computation. This strategy, known as *tabulation* or *memorization*, can be implemented in a strightforward way. Tabulation can sometimes be used to transport processes that require an exponentail number of steps (such as `count-change`) int processes whose space and time requireements grow linearly with the input. See Exercise 3.27.

### Exercise 1.11: A function `f` is defined by the rule that

```
        | n if n < 3   
f(n) = <
        |f(n-1) + 2f(n-2) + 3f(n-3) if n >= 3
```

Write a procedure that computes `f` by means of a recursive process. Write a procedure that computes f by means of 
an iterative process.

### Exercise 1.12: The following pattern of numbers is called Pascal's triangle.

```
1
1 1
1 2 1
1 3 3 1
1 4 6 4 1
...
```

The numbers at the edge of the triangle are all 1, and each number inside the triangle is the sum of the 
two numbers above it. *(35)* Write a procedure that computes elements of Pascal's triangle by means of a recursive process.

> *(35)* The elements of Pascal's triangle are called the *binomial coeffecients*, because the n-th row consists of the coefficients of the terms in the expansion of `(x+y)**n`. This patern for computing the coefficients appeared in Blaise Pascal's 1653 sminal work on probability theory, *Traite du triangle arithmetique*. According to Knuth (1973), the same pattern appears in *Szu-yuen Yu-chein* ("The Precious Mirror of the Four Elements"), publishedby the Chinese methematican Chu Shih-chieh in 1303, in the works of the twelfth-cetury Persian pem and mathematican Omar Khayyam, and in the works of the twelfth-century Hindu mathematican Bhascara Acharya.