# 1.2 Procedures and the Processes They Generate

We have now considered the elements of programming: We have used primitive arithmetic operations,we have combined these operations, and we have abstracted these composite operation by definin them as compound procedures. But that is not enough to enable us to say that we know hot to program. Our situation is analogous to that of someone who has learned the rules for how to pieces move in chess but knows nothing of typical openins, tactics, of strategy. Like novice chess player, we don't yet know the common patterns of usage in the domain. We lack the knowledge of which moves are worth making (which procedures are workth defining). We lack the exeprience to predict the consequences of making a move (execution a procedure).  

The ability to visualize the consequences of the actions under consideration is crucial to becoming an expert programmer, just as it is in any synthetic, creative activity. In becoming an expert photographer, for example, one must learn how to look at a scence an know how dark each region will appear on a print for each possible choise of exposure and development coditions. Ony then can one reaso bacward, planing framing, lighing, exposure, and development ot obtain desired effects. So it is with programming, where we are planning the course of action to be taken by by a process and where we control the process by mans of a porgram. To become experts, we must learn to visualize the processes generated by various types of procedures. Only after we developed such a skill can we leart to reliably construct programs that exhibit the desried behaviour.

A procedure is a pattern for the *local evalution* of a computational process. It specifies how each stage of the process is built upon the previous stage. We would like to be able to make statements about the overall, or *global*, behaviour of a process whonse local evolution has been secified by a procedure. This is very difficult to do in general, but we can at least try to describe some typical patterns of process evolution.

In this section we will examine some common "shapes" for processes generaged by simple procedures. We will also investigate the rates at which these processes consume the important computational resources of time and space. The procedures we will consider are very simple. Their role is lake that played by test patterns in photography: os oversimplified prototypical pattrens, rathe than practical examples in their own right.
